# mini_project_3_clustering

For mini project #3, I thought it would be interesting to look at how colleges are clustered and the business implications of these groupings. This is particularly for college counselors who might be helping students in a variety of circumstances find schools to apply to and the students themselves to help narrow their search. This led me to look for how schools should be clustered so as to create the best groups for counselors to consider schools.

To look at this question, I chose to focus on statistics that might influence a high school senior’s decision to apply to or attend a school including tier, SAT score, graduation rate, and sticker price. Obviously, financial aid may impact the sticker price condition but that was ignored in this analysis due to lack of information and specificity of financial aid on specific family circumstances. 

Any school without data for any of the conditions was removed from the analysis. Z-scores were calculated and four anchors were chosen. Dividing the schools into quadrants, of sorts, seemed like an effective way for counselors to evaluate the institutions. Next, the squared distance between each school with each anchor was calculated and the Solver function was utilized to minimize the distance. 

The four anchors were identified as Southwestern Adventist University, Scripps College, Oklahoma State University, and William Jewell College. Southwestern Adventist University is an extremely small, private religious institution in Texas. The analysis shows that it is a slightly lower tier, slightly low graduation rate, low SAT and slightly low price compared to the average. Scripps College is a small, prestigious, private women’s liberal arts school in California, and is part of the Claremont Colleges. It was a high tier, graduation rate, price and very high SAT. Oklahoma State University is a large public state school and the analysis showed a slightly higher tier, graduation rate, SAT and a low price. William Jewell College is a very small liberal arts school in Missouri, though less prestigious than Scripps. It is a slightly lower tier, average graduation rate and slightly high SAT and price.

Each of these schools are very different ranging from elite and expensive, Scripps College, to a large public university, Oklahoma State University, to two seemingly similar schools but one with generally lower graduation rate, SAT and price, Southwestern Adventist University, and one with slightly high characteristics, William Jewell College. When the schools and their respective anchors were summed, Southwestern Adventist University had 286 schools in its cluster, Scripps College had 100, Oklahoma State University had 229 and William Jewell College had 355. It makes sense that fewer schools fit within the cluster anchored on Scripps College as these schools are generally considered “elite” and therefore may be unaffordable for many or too competitive, whereas other schools may offer more approachable alternatives.

It would be interesting to run this analysis again but taking location into account to see if that would dominate the analysis, as it often does in organization of rankings (“Best colleges in the Northeast”). Location was not accounted for in this analysis because it was not numerical and to calculate the latitude/longitude of each school and incorporating it seemed to be outside the scope of the experiment. It would also be interesting to run the analysis with fewer and more clusters to see how the groupings would change.

Data set was obtained from https://opportunityinsights.org/data/?geographic_level=100&topic=105&paper_id=0#resource-listing. <The Opportunity Atlas>
